# ball_on_a_plate
Full design repository for my embedded design "Ball on a Plate"

Background: 
A couple months ago I saw a video circulating on the internet of an art piece: several scarecrows holding a plate balancing a ball. I thought to myself, "hey, I can do that". As an aspiring embedded software engineer, I wanted to create my own ground-up embedded design of a ball on a plate. I gave myself a deadline of two months and a price point of 100$. I wanted to engage with every aspect of embedded design. So I split my time up evenly between mechanical design, control design, electronic design, and UI desgin. I specifically wanted to explore 3D printing (mechanical) and OpenMV (control) technologies. I also wanted to solidify my circuit/pcb design knowledge and increae my experience with GUI development using Python as aposed to my main language Cpp. 

Development Tehcnologies and Softwares: 

I set out developing my 3D models and engineering drawings using OnShape's standard (free) design software. I cannot stress enough how brilliant OnShape is for developing 3D models on a budget. Their platform is extremely responsive, has advanced functionality, and their online documentation and overall presence is excellent. The platforms version control saved my sanity on mutliple late night brain fart edits. The assembly system is incredibly novel, with a softwares that create mates intuitively. The feature scripts are always usefull and abundent. With no doubt, OnShape helped me explore 3D printing, and meet my time and cost limits. I will definately look into opening a paid prescription. I did all my 3D printing with the trusty AnyCubic Kobra printer. 

For the electronic hardware design, I used EasyEDA's standard (free) design software. I have used EasyEDA for a while now, but I am always overwhelemd with how easy they have made circuit and pcb design. The software is developed by JLC PCB who are also linked directly with LSCS. Chossing parts for a schematic has never been made easier. The software is extremely responsive and versatile. I especially enjoy creating schematic and pcb modules for basic circuits that I know I will use in the future. Due to the link to JLC and LSCS ordering a PCB takes minutes (if that). The platform automatically generates PnP and BOM files. The online assistance during development and ordering is world class. If you mainly work with altium, eagle, or kicad and feel like trying something fresh, try EasyEDA. Because I embedded an ESP32 wroom32 MCU, I wrote my RTOS software in C++ and utilized the Arduino framework. Nothing special here, I am sure we all know how powerful the wroom32 is. Breathtaking functionality on that MCU. 

Having done most of my professional work in C++, I wanted to gain more experience in Python. Therefore, I designed the UI using the PYQT5 Libaries. Game changer. I opted to design the layout with a script, however, if you are just getting into UI design, Qt offers a nice drag n drop software to easily set up your UI layout. . Nevertheless, the functionality that PYQT5 offers is excellent, I highly recommend exploring the package. Obviously python has garnered a reputation for being quite slow, but honeslty, if you understand the basics of multithreading, mutex locks, and how to dodge concurrency, your UI and control logic's speed will not be compramized (at least in my opinion) 

Improvement: 

Electronic: 
Running the UI and control logic run on a GPOS by imbedding a tablet into the system definately took the project overbudget. Having a tablet imbedded into the system is just clumsy and not to mention all the unneccessary overhead that the GPOS brings to the project. That said, I still feel it was the right design choice for the projects first iteration. It made implementing the UI and control software simple enough for me to properly learn the skills that I hoped to gain in both respects. It also helped me reach my 2 month time deadline. In the future I will look to run the system on my own custom operating system by embedding a computer on a module and an LCD screen, and then creating a linux distribution with the yocto project. This should reduce the projects overhead and unneccary costs introudced by the tablet. Having a computer on a module will also mean that the RTOS will no longer be neccessary since the MPU will be able to control the motor drivers directly. I still want an advanced UI, so I am not looking to run the system soley from an MCU. 

Mechanical: 
One of the big sacrafices I made inorder to achieve the time and cost deadline was reducing the mechanical designs complexity and therefore the over systems functionality. Currently, the plate can only balance the ball and perform some basic bouncing. I want to explore a more advanced mechanical system but at the same time I am limited by money and time. My primary goal at the moment is to understand and implement custom operating systems to further my career in embedded software. But, the wind is crying "bounce it". If the elctronic updates go smoothly, which they wont, I will look to introduce a new mechanical dynamics that allow vertical plate motion and therefore more advanced bouncing feature. 

Control: 
I have honeslty had such fun working with the OpenMV camera. I already have several other ideas for different projects that will work with the feedback system and the hardwares libraries. Such a powerful tool whose deeper functionalities I am excited to learn about. Therefore, expect no changes with the control system design direction. OpenMV for the win. 

